---
title: Death Drive
---
Our relationship with death was also the topic of speculation for Sigmund Freud. In his early work, he gave a central role to the ***pleasure principle***. The drive toward life affirming behaviors such as survival instincts, social cooperation, and sex. But this framework was challenged by his encounters with WWI veterans displaying signs of PTSD and substance abuse. He posited the existence of an opposing force, and named it ***death drive*** (Todestrieb). For Freud, this duality of energies he called Eros (life) and Thanatos (death) better explained observations such as masochism, aggression, and the frequent re-enacting of traumatic experiences. From a modern perspective, this duality of life and death drives appears oversimplified at best. Our current understanding of the complex mechanisms underlying PTSD and addictive behavior do not require the existence of a death drive. They are the result of a complex interplay between biases in memory encoding, behavioral heuristics, and the modulating functions of neurotransmitters. But perhaps Freud's Eros and Thanatos can be a useful metaphor. A narrative that helps us grasp the dynamic, fitful, fluid, and often obscure nature of the Self. An inner universe of shifting alliances that are mediated by uncertainty.

<p style="text-align: center; background-color: #fae6d1; padding: 20px">[[choice|Next page]]</p>
<p style="text-align: center; background-color: #f9ecec; padding: 20px">[[jung-quote-red-book|Previous page]]</p>