---
title: Popper
---
To further improve predictions, the next level of organisms evolved larger brains. Dennett calls them **Popperian** creatures, after Austrian philosopher Karl Popper. A larger brain can do all manner of interesting things, but specifically it enhances predictions by doing something unique. A larger brain allows Popperian creatures to build a virtual environment. This **sandbox-of-the-mind** is a testing ground for causal patterns. It allows these creatures to look before they leap. They can pre-test multiple behaviors inside a virtual world and make predictions about which behavior yields the best result. As Karl Popper once put it, these creatures let “_their hypotheses die in their stead._” Not a trivial advantage over lower level creatures! Learning is not a punishing random process of trial and error any more. It is enhanced by the ability to consider multiple options in advance, and de-risk by iterating them in a safe internal testing environment. Multiple options are evaluated before the best candidate for action is chosen and executed. This further reduces uncertainty by removing behaviors that are potentially harmful in advance. Examples of such behavior in animals is found in intelligent birds such as crows, mollusks such as the octopus, as well as most higher level mammals like elephants, whales, cats, and dogs.

<p style="text-align: center; background-color: #fae6d1; padding: 20px">[[gregory|Next page]]</p>
<p style="text-align: center; background-color: #f9ecec; padding: 20px">[[skinner|Previous page]]</p>