---
title: Skinner
---
After bacteria and archaea, organisms evolved better able to encode causal patterns in their environment. In keeping with Dennett’s terminology we will call the next level of evolution **Skinnerian** creatures. They are named after psychologist Burrhus Frederic Skinner, known for his view of behavior as a product of conditioning through reinforcement and punishment. The Skinnerian creature has something no lower level organism possesses. A rudimentary brain. And it uses this organ to do something hitherto unseen. It randomly tries new behaviors and learns from the result. B. F. Skinner called this _operant conditioning_, meaning that behaviors resulting in reward would be reinforced and repeated, whereas behaviors resulting in punishment would be avoided and diminished. A good example of these creatures are mice and other small mammals that have the ability to learn. They have a signifiant advantage over the Darwinian creature. For one, the Skinnerian creature is able to change and adapt its behavior multiple times **within a lifetime**. It has compressed the mechanism of encoding causal patterns into a portable format without the need for genetic mutation. This means it is better suited to dynamically respond to change. Through a process of trial and error, this creature learns new patterns more efficiently, resulting in better predictions. Better predictions make for less uncertainty. However, the ultimate price for learning something new is a creature’s life.

<p style="text-align: center; background-color: #fae6d1; padding: 20px">[[popper|Next page]]</p>
<p style="text-align: center; background-color: #f9ecec; padding: 20px">[[darwin|Previous page]]</p>